  [MUSIC PLAYING]  0:05  Hello and welcome to today's lecture  on the classical legacy.  I'm your professor, Dr. Rob Stephan.  And today we are going to look at the impact  that ancient Greece and ancient Rome  have had on the contemporary world.  So we'll go ahead and start by asking the question, why  study history?  We'll just touch on a couple of points there.  And then we'll look at the legacy of Greece, followed  by the legacy of Rome, and wrap up  with a few concluding thoughts.  Why Study History  So why study history?  Maybe you're asking that question  right now after you've been through most of the course.  But let's go ahead.  One of the issues is that Augustus is not  going to teach you how to computer program.  All right?  And it might be, actually, that learning  ancient Greek and Latin gives you  a sense for how different languages fit together.  So maybe that is useful for programming.  But Augustus himself is not going  to come up and start programming JavaScript for you.  So why do it at all if it's not going to kind of lead directly  into your programming job?  Well, the kind of traditional explanation  is essentially that those who do not study the past  are doomed to repeat it.  And people have been saying that in one form  or another for two millennia.  All right?  The quote itself actually comes from, like, the 1800s and that  was based on a quote from the 1700s.  And that goes all the way back to Livy, actually.  Right?  The guy who wrote the foundation of Rome 2,000 years ago.  And he basically said the reason that he's  writing this is because we've got  all these examples in history of different situations  and actions that were made based on those situations and then  the outcomes for how those actions turned out.  And we can use those to kind decide  what to do in the modern day.  So that's one of the main reasons.  But one of the other reasons is that classical antiquity  very much shapes the way the world is today, especially  here in America.  All right?  So much of what we have in kind of the most prominent realms  of our lives-- in terms of politics and economics  and education and theater and pop culture and everything,  sports--  can go back to ancient Greece and Rome.  So let's go ahead and start with Greece  and look at some of the ways that it  has left a legacy for us today.  Democracy  Now, the number one thing has got to be democracy.  Right?  We say that we live in a democracy today.  And it's ancient Greece, in this kind of time of chaos,  in between being threatened by Sparta  and then Persia coming in a few years later.  They very quickly develop this idea of direct democracy, where  people are chosen by lot to serve on a committee that  sets the agenda of what to vote on,  and then every male citizen can go into a room,  and they raise their hand or they drop their colored stone  into a certain basket, and they are directly voting  on the issues of the day.  Should we raise taxes?  Should we put somebody to death?  Should we go to war with Sparta?  These people are making those decisions.  So democracy today is quite a bit different.  It's actually more like Roman Republicanism.  We'll talk about that in a second.  But this idea of giving power to the people  is one of the most kind of influential aspects  of ancient Greece.  We also have philosophy.  Right?  So we still ask these kind of core questions today.  How does the world work?  Why does it work the way it does?  And then, how should we behave in the world?  Right?  And some of these things end up being the core questions  that we ask in science.  Right?  How does the world work?  And we have people investigating those  in a very kind of scientific way,  for lack of a better term now.  But we also have philosophers talking about the way  that we should act in the world.  Theater and drama.  Right?  Now, the form here has changed.  We still have theater that you can go and watch live people.  But for the most part, you're going to the movies,  you're at home watching Netflix, that sort of thing.  But this idea of kind of tragedy and dramas--  or comedies-- end up going back to ancient Greece.  And one of the cool things here is  this was actually a core part of society.  And it gave people a way to voice their opinions  on kind of the way things were going culturally at the time.  And this especially happened in the Greek world in comedies.  Right?  So comedies were used to be able to express  people's concerns of the day.  And so for example, during the Peloponnesian War,  as Athens and Sparta were fighting,  we get Aristophanes writing plays like the Lysistrata,  where the women of Athens go on a sex strike from the men  until they bring an end to the war.  And it's very much the people saying, hey, why are we  embroiled in this war?  It's not good for anybody.  Now, architecture.  Right?  You're looking at the Hephaisteion  from the Athenian Agora over here.  And then you're looking at the United States Treasury  in Washington, DC, over here.  And man, gee, those look awfully similar.  Right?  So neoclassical architecture gets all of its core components  from the ancient Greek and Roman worlds.  You can do kind of an architectural analysis,  figure out the differences here.  See if you can do it.  OK.  Well, one of them.  Right?  We've got the Doric order over here  with these kind of bowl-shaped capitals,  where we've got the Ionic order over here with the column bases  and with the scroll volute capitals on top.  Sports.  Right?  Sports-- this idea of kind of friendly competition.  Athletic competition goes back to ancient Greece.  We've got statues like the Discobolus.  We've got the Olympics founded in 776 BC.  And those lasted for over 1,000 years in antiquity  before being brought to an end by the emperor Theodosius right  before 400 CE.  But in 1896, a guy by the name by the name  of Pierre de Coubertin ends up bringing this back--  this idea of the Olympics back.  And from 1896 until today, we have these every four years  or, more recently, every two years.  And that's a tradition, again, that  goes back over 2,700 years halfway across the world.  Science and technology.  Right?  If you made it to college and you're watching this right now,  it's probably because you took the SAT.  And if you took the SAT, I know you busted out the Pythagorean  theorem.  And that goes back to our main man here, Pythagoras.  Right?  So things like that-- mathematics, the calendar,  astronomy--  all have monumental developments in the ancient Greek world.  Medicine and health care.  Right?  If you're going into medicine, one day you  will take the Hippocratic oath.  First, do no harm.  And that's named after our guy over here, Hippocrates of Kos.  Now, he had his own kind of versions of sayings,  and they didn't exactly match up to what we call  the Hippocratic oath today.  But he did kind of actually practice that idea of first,  do no harm.  Actually, a lot of what he did was just  tell people to stop eating for a while,  and go drink a lot of water, and maybe have some vinegar.  So basically, kind of go on a cleanse,  and hopefully that'll help you.  But this idea of studying medicine systematically  goes all the way back to Greece, with guys like Hippocrates,  and a couple hundred years after that, a guy  by the name of Galen.  Art.  The fine arts-- especially Renaissance art--  is completely based on ancient Greece and Rome.  And so you can see these ancient Greek and Roman statues  over here of Venus or Aphrodite.  Right?  This is a very particular version  known as the Venus Pudica, where she's covering herself.  And we can see that exact same style used over here  in Botticelli's Birth of Venus.  Right?  And so we can see her rising on the half shell  there, covering herself just like these statues that  came 1,500 years earlier.  And this idea, kind of along with art, this idea of kind  of realism and idealism--  very much embodied in Greece.  Literature.  Right?  In order to understand a lot of literature  from kind of the Renaissance on, you  have to understand ancient Greek and Roman literature.  And even today in the modern world,  when we're looking at things like movies,  we get movies like-- if you've ever seen O Brother,  Where Art Thou?  This is set in a different place, in a different time,  but it exactly models the story of Homer's Odyssey.  And so to really appreciate much of literature  in the modern world, you got to understand  what's going on with literature in ancient Greece.  And then, saving the best for last,  of course we've got delicious wine.  Right?  And so winemaking-- maybe Greece isn't actually  the earliest culture to drink wine.  And if you want to know more about that,  take my humanities 150B1 class, mind-altering substances  in the ancient world, where we'll  talk a lot about the origins of wine  from not just Greece and Rome but from all  over the ancient world.  But Greece is-- it kind of plays a huge role in the Greek diet,  and it became a part of everyday life.  And today, it still is for many people.  Roman Republic  So let's move westward now, across the Mediterranean  to Rome, the legacy of Rome.  So just like we started with democracy for the Greeks, now  we move on to Roman Republicanism.  Right?  Again, perhaps nothing is more important than the idea  that people should share power in the way  that they're governed.  And with the Greek world, we saw this idea of direct democracy.  Everybody goes in and votes on an issue.  Over here in Rome, we have this idea of republicanism,  where we vote on officials to take office  and then the officials do the legislating.  And that's the core idea of Roman Republicanism.  And it's actually much, much closer to what we have.  Even though we call it a democracy today in America,  it's much, much closer to Roman Republicanism.  Now, Romans were able to build this enormous empire.  And a huge part of the reason they were able to do that  is because of their developments in engineering  and construction.  Now, so many buildings today--  I passed some on the way in to record this lecture--  are being made out of concrete right now.  And that development goes back to ancient Rome.  And when you see buildings like this--  this is the roof, the kind of dome of the Pantheon in Rome  that dates back 2,000 years.  It was the largest dome in the world for 1,500 years.  And the reason it can stand up is  because it's made of concrete.  The reason Rome is able to put ports and harbors all around  the Mediterranean is they developed the type of concrete  that will actually set underwater.  And so the use of these kind of everyday things like concrete  and vaults and arches and domes all goes back to ancient Rome.  Christianity  Christianity.  Right?  I was looking it up.  Something like there are 1.6 billion Christians in the world  today.  And that all goes back to Roman antiquity.  Right?  So Jesus is born under the emperor Augustus,  the very first emperor.  He dies under the emperor Tiberius, the second empire.  And then his followers over the next few hundred years  start to grow the religion.  And today, something like a little less than a third  of the world ends up being Christian.  And you can think about why that was an attractive religion back  in Roman antiquity.  In Rome, they don't have a super-developed idea  of the afterlife in traditional kind of Roman pagan religion.  And so the idea that, kind of, you  live life to the best in the life that you've got  is very appealing if you're a rich Roman.  Right?  Go ahead with your convivium.  Drink your wine and hang out and have fun  with your aristocratic friends.  But if you're at the lower end of the spectrum,  it's far less appealing.  And so something like Christianity that says,  hey, don't worry about how crappy your life is right now.  Worry about something beyond, after you die.  That's where you'll be rewarded.  That ends up being very, very appealing  to a kind of marginalized segment of the population.  And 2,000 years later, it's a third  of the world's population.  The Latin language.  Right?  So if you are writing anything down,  if you're taking notes right now,  you are most likely doing so not using the Greek alphabet  but using the Latin script.  And so we still use the Latin script today.  And again, the idea of a script is that you  can write any language in it.  Right?  So you could write Spanish or English or German or Latin  all in the Latin script.  Right?  Using Latin letters, you can write a diversity of languages.  But Latin itself ends up contributing to English  in a particular sort of way.  Something like 60% of the words that we've got in English  go back to Latin roots.  So not only do we use the script, most of our words  today have Latin roots as well.  The idea of codified law.  Right?  Now this sounds really boring.  Right?  OK.  So they wrote some laws down.  What's the big deal?  Well, the big deal is once you write laws down,  everybody has to play by the same rules.  You can't have your aristocratic friends say, oh yeah, well,  don't worry about that.  Right?  Because the laws are now written in stone or bronze  or on a computer, whatever it may be.  Right?  The idea that laws are codified means everybody plays  by the same rules.  And this is really important for the development of equality  within a society.  Architecture.  So what we're looking at here-- we are looking at the Pantheon  in Rome on the left hand side, dating back originally  to Marcus Agrippa-- that's whose name is up there--  but then rebuilt by Hadrian in the second century AD.  It's this super weird kind of temple  where it's like rectilinear on the front  and then cylindrical on the back.  And for 1,500 years, it has the largest dome in the world.  And we're not looking at a model of the Pantheon over here  on the right.  What we're looking at is--  take a guess.  That's right.  It's the Jefferson Memorial.  Right?  So in Washington, DC, the Jefferson Memorial  is directly modeled on the Pantheon.  And so just like we saw with the US Treasury and something  like the Hephaisteion in the Athenian Agora,  we see all the same kind of elements.  Capitals and a dome.  This kind of podium over here.  The idea that you have the rectilinear front and that  cylindrical back.  A lot of influence from ancient Roman architecture  shows up today, especially in neoclassical architecture.  Infrastructure.  Right?  You've heard all roads lead to Rome.  Right?  And so Romans were known for building these elaborate road  networks.  And one of the coolest things is you can still  go walk on them today.  Right?  You can see here the old cart marks,  that would have been driven by donkeys or horses or whatever.  You can see they've worn their way into this ancient Roman  road.  And you, too, can go outside the walls of Rome  and go walking down the Via Appia.  And this idea-- roads are a huge part  of the way that we get around.  And along with sewage systems and aqueducts and ports  and harbors, this idea of a fundamentally strong  infrastructure is very much a part  of the ancient Roman world.  Sport and spectacle.  We looked at sport with the ancient Greek world.  And we looked at things like the Olympics.  And we often associate sport with ancient Greece  because it's more about the athletic competition itself.  We often associate spectacle with ancient Rome  because it's about the crowds.  Right?  In a way that is kind above and beyond what was going on  in the Greek world, you get crowds involved with Rome  at the gladiatorial games and in the circuses.  So the Colosseum held something like 50,000 people.  Right?  It's about the size of a college football stadium today.  And they were all there to cheer on their favorite gladiator  or their favorite chariot racing team.  And so it became something more than just kind  of participating in a sport for the athletic kind  of competition and the kind of health benefits.  It became a place to go be social, to be, to be seen,  and to see people and to meet people,  and to interact with one another.  The military.  Right?  The idea of a professional military goes back to Rome.  All right?  And so we got a military today where you can sign up for it  and that's your job.  Right?  You get paid to do it.  You get benefits afterwards.  Right?  Whether that's education or retirement benefits,  something like that.  This idea goes back to Rome.  And it wasn't always like that.  In the early days of Rome, the idea  was that only citizens from the city could be--  citizens of Rome could be part of the military.  And you had to have land and be able to equip yourself  with the weapons and armor necessary.  But later, under Marius, we see him professionalize the army,  say that the government will pay for your armor and weapons,  that you don't have to have land,  that you'll get an annual salary,  and that if you serve a certain amount of time  you're going to get some land when you retire.  All right?  And so that idea of the Army as a full time job  rather than a citizen militia that rises up when called upon  is something that goes back to the Roman civilization.  And then finally, once again the most important thing--  wine.  Right?  And if the Greeks liked their wine,  the Romans liked it even more.  And so in the Roman world, you've  got all these different varietals.  Right?  So you've got your regular wine, you've got this Egyptian wine.  They mixed it with honey and other weird kind of things.  Falernian wine, that was like the highest level of wine.  It was very expensive in the ancient Roman world.  That's what the emperors drank.  And it became kind of so popular that people in the Roman world  are drinking something like a liter of wine  per person per day.  So you should probably not do that.  That's a little bit overkill.  But Rome definitely influenced us  in making this a very kind of popular beverage.  Conclusion  So a few concluding thoughts.  There are a lot of different reasons  to study classical antiquity.  Right?  And one of the main ones is if you don't study it,  you're going to be doomed to repeat  the mistakes of the past.  But one of the big reasons is that ancient Greece  and ancient Rome have a huge influence.  Right?  You can look at the Senate floor in ancient Rome,  you can look at the Senate floor in modern America.  One of the huge reasons is that both Greece and Rome  have played an incredible role in developing American society  throughout our history, but especially in the 21st century.  And that's what we might call the classical legacy.  [MUSIC PLAYING]